# Relative diversity: Experiment 1

Frequency-dependent benefits of host diversity (dilution effects) are widespread in natural host-pathogen systems (Civitello et al. 2015 PNAS). Increasing the number of resistant or low-quality hosts decreases the fraction of susceptible hosts, reducing contact rates between free-living pathogens or infectious individuals, which in turn limits the basic reproduction number of the pathogen (Dobson 2004 Am Nat; Gandon 2004 Evol; Lively 2010 Am Nat). Frequency-dependence influences phage dynamics (Dennehy et al. 2007 Ecol Lett; Common & Westra 2019 RNA Bio) and evolutionary emergence.

If we assume no cross-infection, then the dilution effect could still operate even if a host population is challenged by a diverse pathogen population. A phage can only ever infect one host genotype, and if that host’s relative frequency depends on host diversity, phage spread could potentially be limited. Consequently, the dilution effect may maintain host protection in the context of challenge by a diverse phage population. Further, accounting for phage diversity may also limit evolutionary emergence at intermediate host diversity (Chábàs et al. 2018 PLoS Bio), as the whole host population is potentially infected thereby reducing selection on each phage genotype to evolve.  

To test these predictions, we conducted an experiment using the following relative diversity treatments (host CRISPR diversity:phage diversity) - 3:3, 6:6, 12:12, and 24:24. Essentially, the logic is to keep relative diversity constant while changing absolute diversity. This was be performed in M9 minimal media for 3 days, and included the ∆pilA strain in equal proportion to the CRISPR mix. Throughout we measured overall phage titre (the size of the phage population), as well as the titre of individual phage genotypes; selection rate of the overall CRISPR population; and selection rate of a single lacZ-labelled clone among the CRISPR population. We also compare these data with data from Common et al. 2019 biorXiv to test the interaction between phage and host diversity.

