The project, including raw data, R code, and the manuscript, can be followed at GitHub: JackCommon/Relative_diversity

# General introduction
Host diversity often associates with reduced pathogen success. This idea has gained ample support from numerous observational and experimental studies spanning a wide range of host-pathogen systems. Less well-understood is how pathogen diversity may interact with host diversity. Like their hosts, pathogens are often diverse . Indeed, pathogens may be among the most diverse organisms on Earth, as their lifecycle is often characterised by short generation times, high mutation rates, large population sizes, and rapid selection.

Given the recognition that pathogens tend to have high within-species diversity, it makes sense that the effects of host diversity on pathogen success are likely to depend on the relative levels of host-pathogen diversity. A very small number of studies have investigated how host and pathogen diversity might interact and influence epidemiology and host success. However, the effect of relative host-pathogen diversity, if any, on pathogen success is poorly understood and ambiguous. 

The interaction between lytic bacteriophage (phage) and the bacterial CRISPR-Cas (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats; CRISPR-associated) immune system represents a tractable model system to study the role of relative host-pathogen diversity. It has been used previously to show that host CRISPR diversity can limit phage spread, phage evolutionary emergence, and that these two are linked by an eco-evolutionary dynamics. The nature of this system allows direct manipulation of CRISPR and phage diversity, as well as relatively simple assays to track evolutionary and ecological dynamcis during experiments.

We currently have a library of 24 Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 clones, each with a unique CRISPR spacer, and 24 DMS3vir phage isolates that can only infect one clone in the library. This corresponds to a matching allele model of host-pathogen specificity. This allows us to precisely manipulate both CRISPR and phage divesrity. Additinally, eight of the PA14 clones are lacZ-tagged, which allows us to track the competitive performance of a single clone during an epidemic. 

# Experiment 1 overview: frequency-dependent host benefits 
This experiment has already been conducted as of 11/10/19, with most data collected and analyses begun. 

Frequency-dependent benefits of host diversity (dilution effects) are widespread in natural host-pathogen systems. Increasing the number of resistant or low-quality hosts decreases the fraction of susceptible hosts, reducing contact rates between free-living pathogens or infectious individuals, which in turn limits the basic reproduction number of the pathogen. Frequency-dependence can influence phage dynamics and evolutionary emergence.

If we assume no cross-infection, then the dilution effect could still operate even if a host population is challenged by a diverse pathogen population. A phage can only ever infect one host genotype, and if that host’s relative frequency depends on host diversity, phage spread could potentially be limited. Consequently, the dilution effect may maintain host protection in the context of challenge by a diverse phage population. Further, accounting for phage diversity may also limit evolutionary emergence at intermediate host diversity, as the whole host population is potentially infected thereby reducing selection on each phage genotype to evolve.  

The hypotheses are then:
1. If the dilution effect maintains diversity-mediated host protection, phage titre will be statistically similar among treatments with poly- or monoclonal phage.
2a. If the dilution effect maintains diversity-mediated host protection, overall CRISPR selection rate will be statistically similar among treatments with poly- or monoclonal phage.
2b. IIf the dilution effect maintains diversity-mediated host protection, the selection rate of the lacZ-tagged CRISPR clone will increase with CRISPR diversity.
3. If the whole host population is infected and seleciton for evolutionary emergence is limited, we will observe a smaller proportion of phage that evovle to infect new hosts in treatments with polyclonal phage compared to monoclonal phage.

To test these hypotheses, the experiment uses the following relative diversity treatments shown below: 3-host x 3-phage; 6-host x 6-phage; 12-host x 12-phage; 24-host x 24-phage. Essentially, the logic is to keep relative diversity constant while changing absolute diversity. The experiment lasted for 3 days post-infection (dpi), and phage titre and the host (labelled and unlabelled) were monitored each day. We are also comparing the data from this experiment with the raw data in Common et al (2019) biorXiv, as these are the same host diversity treatments but infected with pre-evolved monoclonal phage. This provides a test of the overall effect of the interaction of phage diversity with host diversity. 

We initially planned to monitor just the overall phage titre, and hypothesis 1 was formulated around this. After the experiment had finished, JC realised that the titre of each individual phage genotype could be monitored using simple spot assays on the target PA14 clone. The analysis of this is therefore exploratory and will hopefully allow us to generate novel hypotheses.

# Experiment 1: statistics 
All statistical analyses are carried out in R v3.5.3. The packages dplyr, tidyr and magrittr are used throughout for data handling. Generalised linear mixed models (GLMMs) are used throughout, and replicate is treated as a random effect in all models. Model selection follows a nested approach, where full versus reduced models are compared using information criteria, and the similarity between observed and predicted values. The overall statistical significance of the single and interaction effects of fixed effects (that is, treatment and dpi) is assed using likelihood ratio tests (LRTs), which give an F- and associated p-value. Simple Bayesian GLMMs from the MCMCglmm package are used to analyse phage evolution. These models use a probit transformation (the inverse standard normal distribution of the probability) and a flat prior. The overall statistical significance of the single and additive effects of fixed effects in these models is assessed using chi-squared tests and their associated p-values using the VCVglmm package. When phage titre is considered as the response variable, data is log-transformed to improve model fit. Confidence (or in the case of Bayesian models, highest probability density) intervals around model coefficients and predicted means are calculated to the 95%, 89% and 67% level to give a clearer indication of effect size. The package ggplot2 is used to generate figures.
